today I'm joined by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer Rishi sunic and Jenny
Harris deputy chief medical officer
yesterday I set out the ambition of this
government to turn the tide against
coronavirus within three months and I
want to repeat that determination today
we're going to do it with testing we're
gonna do it with new medicines and new
digital technology that will help us to
see the disease as it is transmitted and
thereby by illuminating it to stamp it
out and above all now we're going to
defeat this disease with a huge national
effort to slow the spread by reducing
unnecessary social contact and I want to
thank everybody for following the
guidance we issued on Monday to stay at
home for seven days if you think you
have the symptoms for 14 days if anyone
in your household has either of the
symptoms a new continuous cough or a
high temperature to avoid pubs bars
clubs and restaurants to work from home
if at all possible keep washing your
hands and I know it's been tough and I
know it has been inconvenient but these
actions that were all taking together
are helping to take the strain off our
NHS and bit by bit day by day by your
actions your restraint and your
sacrifice we are putting this country in
a better and stronger position where we
will be able to save literally thousands
of lives of people of all ages people
who don't deserve to die now people
whose lives can must and will be saved
and as we take these actions together as
we make these sacrifices we can see the
impact on the real economy already
fantastic
British companies already under huge
strength big and small workers who are
finding that their jobs under threat or
going through no fault of their own and
to all of them we in government say we
will stay
and by you and I say that two companies
remember our joint objective to beat
this virus and we will do everything in
our power to help and in just a minute
Rishi is going to explain how we're
going to help workers of all kinds to
get through this crisis supporting you
directly in a way that government has
never done before
in addition to the package that we've
already set out for for business and of
course these measures are intended these
steps that we're taking are intended to
be temporary and of course I am
confident that in time the UK economy is
going to bounce back of course it is but
I must be absolutely clear with you the
speed of our eventual recovery depends
entirely on our ability our collective
ability to get on top of the virus now
and that means we have to take the next
steps on scientific advice and following
our plan we are strengthening the
measures announced on Monday which you
remember and already people have made a
huge effort to comply with those
measures for avoiding unnecessary social
contact but we need now to push down
further on that curve of transmission
between us and so following an agreement
between all the four nations of the
United Kingdom all the devolved
administration's we are collectively
telling telling cafes pubs bars and
restaurants to close tonight as soon as
they reasonably can and not to open
tomorrow though to be clear they can
continue to provide takeout services
we're also telling nightclubs theatres
cinemas gyms and leisure centres to
close on the same time scale now
these are places where people come
together and indeed the whole purpose in
many cases of these businesses is to
bring people together but the sad thing
is I'm afraid today for now at least
physically we need to keep people apart
and I want to stress that we will review
the situation each month to see if we
can relax any of these measures and
listening to what I have just said some
people may of course be tempted to go
out tonight and I say to you please
don't you may think that you're
invincible but there is no guarantee
that you will get mild symptoms and you
can still be a carrier of the disease
and pass it on to others so that's why
as far as possible we want you to stay
at home that's how we can protect our in
the HS and save lives I know to repeat I
know how difficult this is and how it
seems to go against the freedom-loving
instincts of the of the British people
and I also know I also know how much
right now
workers and business deserve the
financial reassurance that we are giving
but we will get through this we will get
through it together and we will beat
this virus and to ram that point home
the more effectively we follow the
advice that we are given the faster this
country will stage both a medical and an
economic recovery info thank you very
much I'm gonna pass now to to Rishi
who's going to explain some of the
explain the financial support for
workers Thank You Prime Minister good
afternoon the economic intervention that
I'm announcing today is unprecedented in
the history of the British state
combined with our previous announcements
on public services and business support
our planned economic response will be
one of the most comprehensive in the
world
let me speak directly to people's
concerns I know that people are worried
about losing their jobs about being not
being able to pay the rent or mortgage
about not having enough set by for food
and bills I know that some people in the
last few days have already lost their
jobs to all those at home right now
anxious about the days ahead I say this
you will not face this alone but getting
through this will require a collective
national effort with a role for everyone
to play people businesses government
it's on all of us to meet our commitment
to that effort I am today announcing a
combination of measures unprecedented
for a government of this nation our plan
for people's jobs and incomes will
protect people's jobs offer more
generous support to those who are
without employment strengthen the safety
net for those who work for themselves
and help people stay in their homes the
first part of our plan is to protect
people's jobs this week the government
has taken unprecedented steps to fight
the coronavirus we have closed schools
we have told people to stay at home to
prevent the spread of infection we are
now closing shops restaurants bars those
steps are necessary to save lives but we
don't do this lightly
we know these measures will have a
significant economic impact I have a
responsibility to make sure that we
protect as far as possible people's jobs
and incomes today I can announce it for
the first time in our history the
government is going to step in and help
to pay people's wages we're setting up a
new coronavirus job retention scheme any
employer in the country
small or large charitable or nonprofit
will be eligible for the scheme
employers will be able to contact HMRC
for a grant to cover most of the wages
of people who are not working but are
furloughed and kept on payroll
rather than being laid off government
grants will cover 80 percent of the
salary of retained workers up to a total
of 2,500 pounds a month that's just
above the median income and of course
employers can top up salaries further if
they choose to
that means workers in any part of the UK
can retain their job even if their
employer cannot afford to pay them and
be paid at least 80 percent of their
salary the coronavirus job retention
scheme will cover the cost of wages back
dated to March the 1st and will be open
initially for at least three months and
I will extend the scheme for longer if
necessary I am placing no limit on the
amount of funding available for the
scheme we will pay grants to support as
many jobs as necessary and can I put on
record my thanks to the Trades Union
Congress for CBI and other business
groups for our constructive
conversations we said we would stand
together with the British people and we
meant it we have never had a scheme in
our country like this before and we're
having to build our systems from scratch
I can assure you that HMRC are working
night and day to get the scheme up and
running and we expect the first grants
to be paid within weeks and we're aiming
to get it done before the end of April
but I know that many businesses are
hurting now I've already taken
extraordinary measures to make cash
available to businesses through loans
grants and guarantees I can announce
today that the coronavirus business
interruption loan scheme will not be
interest-free as previously planned for
six months it will now be interest-free
for 12 months and thanks to the enormous
efforts of our critical financial
services sector those low
will now be available starting on Monday
and I will announce further measures
next week on top of those the governor
and I have already taken to ensure that
larger and medium-sized businesses can
also access the credit they need I'm
also announcing today further cash flow
support through the cash tax system to
help businesses pay people and keep them
in work I'm deferring the next quarter
of v80 payments that means no business
will pay nav 8e from now until the end
of June and you'll have until the end of
the financial year to repay those bills
that is a direct injection of over 30
billion pounds of cash to businesses
equivalent to one and a half percent of
GDP let me speak directly to businesses
I know it's incredibly difficult out
there we in government are doing
everything we can to support you we're
paying people's wages up to 80 percent
so someone can be furloughed rather than
laid off to protect their jobs we're
deferring over 30 billion pounds of
taxes until the end of the financial
year we're lending unlimited sums of
money interest-free for 12 months
we're abolishing business rates
altogether this year if you're in
hospitality retail and leisure we're
providing cash grants of twenty five
thousand pounds for small business
properties the government is doing its
best to stand behind you and I am asking
you to do your best to stand behind our
workers we're launching in the coming
days a major national advertising
campaign to communicate the available
business support for businesses and
people please look very carefully at
that support before making any decisions
to lay people off it's on all of us we
are starting a great national effort to
protect jobs but the truth is we are
already seeing job losses and there may
be more to come
I cannot promise you that no one will
face hardship in the weeks ahead so we
will also act to protect you if the
worst happens to strengthen the safety
net I'm increasing today the Universal
Credit standard allowance for the next
12 months by 1,000 pounds a year for the
next 12 months I'm increasing the
working tax credit basic element by the
same amount as well together these
measures will benefit over four million
of our most vulnerable households and
I'm strengthening the safety net for
self-employed people - by suspending the
minimum income floor for everyone
affected by the economic impacts of
coronavirus that means self-employed
people can now access in full universal
credit at a rate equivalent to statutory
sick pay for employees taken together
I'm announcing nearly 7 billion pounds
of extra support through the welfare
system to strengthen the safety net and
protect people's incomes and to support
the self-employed through the tax system
I'm also announcing today that the next
self assessment payments will be
deferred to January 2021 as well as
keeping people in work and supporting
those who lose their jobs or work for
themselves our plan for jobs and incomes
will help keep a roof over your head
we've acted already to make sure
homeowners can get a three month
mortgage holiday if they need it I'm
announcing today nearly 1 billion pounds
of support for renters by increasing the
generosity of Housing Benefit and
universal credit so that the local
housing allowance will cover at least
30% of market rents in your area the
actions I've taken today represent an
unprecedented economic intervention to
support the jobs and incomes of the
British people a new comprehensive job
retention scheme
and a significantly strengthened safety
net unprecedented measures for
unprecedented times let me close with
one final observation now more than at
any time in our history we will be
judged by our capacity for compassion
our ability to come through this won't
just be down to what government or
businesses do but by the individual acts
of kindness that we show each other
the small business who does everything
they can not to lay off their staff this
student who does a shot for their
elderly neighbor the retired nurse who
volunteers to cover some shift in their
local hospital when this is over and it
will be over we want to look back on
this moment and remember the many small
acts of kindness done by us and to us we
want to look back on this time and
remember how we thought first of others
and acted with decency we want to look
back on this time and remember how in
the face of a generation defining moment
we undertook a collective national
effort and we stood together it's on all
of us thank you thank you very much wish
you Jennie as anything you want to say
this at this stage okay well perhaps you
can help us feel that any questions from
the scientific and medical point of view
as they come can I go first
Alex precise from the from the BBC thank
you very much the measures you've
announced today will have a significant
impact not just on business of course
but on people's lives can you tell us
what has changed that's made you
introduce these measures now how long if
you can do you see these measures
lasting and how do you plan to enforce
them and Chancellor if I may you talk
about unprecedented measures that you're
taking how can you be sure that the tax
and welfare system can cope to ensure
that this support goes to those people
who need it and need it quickly thank
you thanks well Alex what we're doing
today is really enforcing
we set out in in the fourth part of her
advice on Monday I think people made a
huge effort in the last four or five
days to to comply we saw big reductions
in people attending some pubs a lot of
pubs across the country a lot of effort
was made by people to to reduce
unnecessary social contact as we said
but it was becoming clear that in order
to drive that curve dontoh to reduce the
unnecessary social gatherings by by 75
percent which is what the science tells
us we need to do to have an impact on
that curve that curve then we need now
to be making it absolutely clear that
we're going to enforce these closures
and so that's the the the the the pubs
bars clubs and so on that I that I
mention in addition to gyms leisure
centres and so on now how are we going
to enforce it well clearly there are
licensing arrangements that will make it
I think relatively simple to do should
that really be necessary I think in
reality and you know we will enforce it
strictly but in reality I think
everybody can see the imperative of
doing what is necessary of protecting
our NHS and in saving lives
Ritchie Alex you're absolutely right
asked right to ask the question I think
when I was here earlier I said it's all
very well it's easy for me to stand here
and announce things but I want to make
sure that the help I'm announcing can
get to the people that we want to
benefit from it and so that's why as
we've thought about what we're doing
there are various ways you can design
job support schemes and there are
various ways that we can get extra money
into our welfare system to strengthen
the safety net we have deliberately
focused on scheme design and particular
policies that we know are easy to
operationalize quickly and there are
many ideas that people have about how to
do all these things and we've been
looking through all of them
but I would put on record my thanks to
the staff HMRC and the Department for
Work and Pensions
they themselves will be under enormous
operating pressure over the coming weeks
and months like all of us and every
business so as I said we specifically
designed this scheme to work in a way
that minimizes the operational
complexity and similarly with the
welfare interventions that we've made we
have deliberately picked those that are
absolutely the easiest and most
straightforward and require the least
manual intervention Thanks Larissa Brown
Daily Mail Thank You Prime Minister
could we get to a stage where NHS
workers have to have to choose who to
try and save because there aren't enough
ventilators and also it's obviously
Mother's Day this Sunday are you urging
people to stay away from their mothers
and will you be seeing yours thank you
the the first question about about
clinical judgments doctors in the NHS
clinicians in the NHS already make very
difficult judgments but our objective
and the objective of this whole campaign
is to ensure that we we flatten the the
curve as we've been saying repeatedly
over the last couple of weeks we flatten
the curve but also that we lift up the
line of NHS resilience and capabilities
that means there's a massive effort
going on right now to ensure that we do
have enough ventilators enough IIC use
to cope and that is the that is why it's
so vital that people follow the measures
that we've outlined and ask for for
mother's day look I think my my my
advice would would be that people should
really think very carefully about
irrespective of whether their mother
whether any elderly person who may be in
a vulnerable group doesn't matter with
her necessarily over 70 the issue is
whether they are in one of the the
vulnerable groups think very carefully
about the risk of transmission of the
virus and and follow the follow the
advice look at the look at the medical
advice our advice is that elderly people
people with serious underlying health
conditions
people in the later stages of pregnancy
you have to be careful about the
transmission of the virus and I'm sure
people will handle that advice
accordingly and I'm in regular contact
with all members of my family but I'll
be working very hard on Sunday I can
tell you that much
I'll certainly be sending in my very
best wishes and hope to get to see you
jack on ITV prime minister there has
been an escalation in the measures that
you have been recommending and advising
and now ordering are we going to get to
a stage where there are further measures
that you consider including potentially
limiting transport and movement of
people around the country and to the
Chancellor if I may well this wage
protection scheme cover those on
zero-hour contracts if so given that so
many people on zero-hour contracts do
not have a set salary every month how
will their wages be determined and
hoo-yeah Bond on transport I don't know
whether you were here yesterday our
transport is fundamental to our ability
to deliver vital public services I was
pretty clear that we don't want for
instance to to immobilize the tube or or
our major transport networks you know
it's it's just too important for the
delivery of crucial public services yes
and on those everyone who's covered by
the scheme it covers everybody who is on
the pay ye system through a company so
we publishing detailed guidance shortly
that depending on your particular
employment contract it might be
different depending on who you are
covers a zero hours covers a variety of
different situations but it may well be
that you are on a pay ye scheme and have
a set of regular earnings and it will be
covered depending on your particular
circumstance
I can't generalize for every single
person's employment status but in
general or desire here is to cover as as
broad a range of people as possible
we've wanted to make it as comprehensive
as scheme as possible for those in
employment which is why we have an
limited by company by sector by size of
business were deliberately targeted to
do as economy-wide an intervention
as we can Sam coats guy news Chancellor
you can all announce an extraordinarily
large package today do you have any
sense of how much it'll cost per month
and presumably it'll be funded by
borrowing so can you guarantee that this
package will be available month after
month up to maybe 18 months which some
of the scientific studies suggest might
be the duration of what we're facing
Jenny Harris millions of children broke
up today for the last time from school
could you just be crystal clear about
what children should and shouldn't do
from Monday can they go to the park go
to the playground have playdates with
their friends I know there's a lot of
confusion out there and prime minister
Scalise has talked to a senior emergency
medicine consultant in a South London
hospital today
he's just warning about the dangers
ahead the fact that they're not set up
for the huge numbers of ventilators
needed the disbelief they feel at the
keys outside supermarket with people too
close together and calling for more
lockdown and warning that we could be in
a situation worse than Italy and upset
at what they call the falsely placed
sense of optimism they see amongst some
politicians what is your message to that
doctor you're right it is a significant
intervention we've thought through that
and our intention is to finance the
package through the government's normal
debt management operations as we've
already announced the Treasury and the
DMO of the debt management office are
shortly to publish a comprehensive
update to the guilt financing remit and
that will be done in April and of course
the DMO Treasury and Bank of England are
coordinating closely to support the
functioning of the gilt market and were
very confident that we can finance it in
that way I think there should be some
guidance published today from the
department a scientific input the basic
strand running through all of these
measures is about social distancing and
reducing the totality of our social
interactions that applies to children
just as it
to the rest of us but also there is a
balance there between maintaining
physical and mental well-being when
we're going through what will be for all
of us quite a stressful period so for
children who are at home a family or a
household group usually has the same
sort of exposure risk
so put nicely that just means it's okay
for them to play together usually in
their own home environment kick a ball
around in the garden if they have one
we're not saying don't go outside but we
are saying if you go outside go in a way
which reduces your social contact so
clearly for children there is a safety
issue here in a safeguarding one we
don't want to suggest every small child
should go off in a solitary walk across
the park that would not be a helpful
public health measure but certainly with
appropriate supervision budding children
for example keeping two metres apart or
for a bike ride together or something
that is absolutely fine and in many ways
we would encourage that but there are
some simple principles again around that
you know make sure you hang on to your
own bike your own equipment to whatever
wash your hands regularly if you're you
know if you got coughs and sneezes
obviously use a tissue all the things
that we've been encouraging people to do
so very much we want children the
weather is getting better we want
children to be exercising but to do so
not in groups and I think one of the
issues is where you have teen games for
example it's not just the team game
itself which can be problematic so I
would not encourage those but it's even
the most important bit also is the
social element round it so if everybody
piles up in shared cars that's not a
good thing to do and if everybody tried
they won't be able to no but if
everybody tried to go to a cafe or
restaurant afterwards that would also
not be a good thing to do so exercising
fine but cut right down on the social
connections accused of under estimating
the scale of the crisis this country now
faces it's perfectly obvious when you
look at the gradient of the of the
disease that we have a real threat now
to our country to our the ability of our
NHS to manage it and unless we get this
right you know we are going to see
thousand
of of lives lost as I say needlessly but
we have an opportunity as I've said to
get on top of it to make sure that we
turn the tide and to do that we've got
to follow the advice that we're giving
it and that's why we're taking the
measures that we are today that's why
it's absolutely vital that people do
avoid unnecessary social contact and
that's why we're we're closing the pubs
and the bars and and the theatres and so
on because we need now to stop the
velocity of circulation of this disease
and and I've made it very clear to the
country that we will take exceptional
measures to do that but we are also
taking exceptional measures to help and
to compensate those who are adversely
economically affected by what we have to
do as a country and I think everybody
understands the two halves of this
everybody understands that people in
employment businesses workers everybody
is making a huge sacrifice now to
protect the lives of people who are
vulnerable to coronavirus and it's
absolutely vital and right that the
government should stand behind those
businesses and those workers as well and
that's what we're doing today and on
your second point about about
supermarkets look I said this yesterday
and I make the same point again I think
people should should shop reasonably and
considerately we do have fantastic
supply chains were having another
meeting with the supermarkets tomorrow
I'm chairing another meeting with the
supermarkets tomorrow and you know
they're very confident they can get the
stuff from from farm to fork so
everybody should just just shop
reasonably and be considerate of others
Francis Eliot the times Thank You mr.
suno you mentioned shops can you clear
out whether shops are to be forced to
close it didn't appear on the list that
was mentioned by the prime minister and
Jenny Harris could you update us on how
we are doing with protective personal
equipment that's obviously a something
that's
deeply concerning and mr. Johnson could
you just say in very simple terms what
you think about people who are ignoring
the advice it seems to you resisted the
temptation yesterday to to the
invitation to say that they were
behaving immoral or do you not think
that if people aren't following these of
us they are actually being immoral
no just very specifically the list that
the prime minister gave and Jenny
outlined as a specific list they were
just talking in more general terms but
there's a very specific category of
places where social contact happens
which is significant to the spread of
the virus which Jenny is spoken to her
can speak to again but that I meant very
specifically the places this year and
the prime minister had referred to
already so yes it's very much those
areas where people are gathering for
social reasons so in many ways we
they're almost encouraging the spread of
disease simply by it by virtue of those
establishments so restaurants cafes bars
are where you're meeting but we
recognize how difficult this is for
people's lives so having takeout
facilities or the opportunity to convert
some of those means that food supplies
will continue and that applies very much
to supermarkets obviously and other
shops
so it's leisure centers if you are
exercising outside that is fine but
inside is not appropriate so the later
centers will close so it's it's areas
you can imagine where you are going
purposefully for social gathering which
are the ones that we're most keen to
reduce the social interactions yes and
so P P so the country has a perfectly
adequate supply of personal protective
equipment PPE at the moment that
encompasses quite a wide range of
different gowns masks gloves all sorts
of things there have been I think some
differential deliveries if you like in
some areas which has caused a degree of
concern recently that is completely
resolved now
and in fact what we've done in the last
36 hours is set up an entirely separate
PPE oversight and supply chain which
allows hospitals but also we need to be
very clear there are other work
in the care system who are equally
important and will allow that
appropriate management to ensure that
the supply and demand is there and I
think we do need to be really clear this
is an unprecedented event health event
in for this country and so it is not
unlikely in many ways that we will have
found a pressure in the early days where
an individual Hospital individual trust
or organization has had to suddenly ramp
up its demand but that supply is there
and running alongside that is a call out
arms a bit like ventilators and testing
as well to make sure we are exploring
every avenue and opportunity for keeping
those supplies coming through on your
moral point I don't want to get into you
know moral name-calling and so on so
forth but I do accept that what we're
doing is extraordinary we're taking away
the ancient inalienable right of
Freeborn people of the United Kingdom to
go to the pub and I can understand how
people feel about that but I say to
people who do go against the advice that
we're getting the very clear advice that
we're getting from our medical and
scientific experts you know you're not
only putting your own life or the lives
of your family at risk you're
endangering the community and you're
making it more difficult for us to get
on and protect the NHS and save lives
and if you comply if people comply as I
say then we will not only save lives
thousands of lives but will come out of
this thing all the faster Tom Newton
Gunn the son Thank You Prime Minister
by closing pubs restaurants clubs etc
it's another considerable risk that what
you're therefore do immediately is push
maybe many young people into their own
homes not just have big parties
you're not gonna ban parties or are you
and what is your advice to young people
not to gather in groups of a hundred and
drink the same amount buying closed
doors and the chance of you know mommy
asking the one element of society fears
you missed out with all this is
charities the voluntary sector though
you're covering their wages charity
income is down
forty percent since the start of this in
only a couple of weeks they've asked you
for a bailout as well we do now consider
that thank you so in terms of support
for the charity sector the significant
business rates relief schemes that we
operated in the last week or two will
certainly benefit them which will you
have direct cash flow benefit to them
and they are covered by today's
intervention which you know I would I
would underscore is is significant in
terms of more support for voluntary and
community groups that's something that
I'm actively talking to the Secretary of
State for Communities for and especially
as as we try and look after the most
vulnerable in our communities it may
well be that we should increase funding
for local voluntary community groups to
help to help with that and that's
something else that were actively
looking at but just to underline more
broadly you the scheme that I've
outlined today is is unprecedented in in
scope and scale for a British government
and it is an enormous commitment by us
to British jobs and British workers this
is going to be difficult but we are with
you through this and we're doing
absolutely everything we can to support
your jobs and to support your incomes
through this time yeah and about young
people obviously we can't forbid every
form of of socializing between human
beings of course we're not doing that
but on the other hand what we are saying
is that the risk is for not just for
young people the risk is that they will
become vectors of the disease for older
relatives with with potentially fatal
consequences and we ask people to think
about that and that's why we're taking
the steps that we're taking the decisive
steps we're taking in respective places
that actually invite people to socialise
that's why we've issued the very strong
advice that we have and I really hope
everybody takes it I'm afraid we have to
wrap up now because we've got more
things to go and way and do but to two
important things that I hope you'll take
away from today two important bits of of
news yes we are telling pubs
restaurants clubs - clothes gyms leisure
centres we're telling them declares and
it's a huge wrench to do that everybody
understands that it's a huge Reggie and
and I it's it's heartbreaking to think
of the businesses that will face
difficulties as a result of the measures
this country has had to take but that is
why we are also simultaneously
announcing a quite exceptional package
of support and not just for businesses
but for individual workers and our
message to business is that we will
stand behind you and we hope that you
will stand behind your workers and to
the country this time it is different we
all remember what happened in 2008 this
time we want to make sure as we heal the
economic damage that this is causing
that we put the people first
thanks for very much
[Music]